README.md, before:

# Exoplanet System Generator

AI-driven stellar system generation & N-body physics simulation with 3D visualization. The model can generate systems with planetary masses all the way down to tiny asteroid-like objects (0.0001) up to gas giants and brown dwarfs (100,000 Earth masses). That huge range is because real exoplanet data spans everything from sub-Earth planets to super-Jupiters, so the model learned that full spectrum of possibilities.  

## [**DEMO**](https://adamfehse.github.io/someoneWondered/)

## TL;DR 

**Tech**: Transformer (RoPE, AdamW, cosine annealing) (PyTorch) + FastAPI + Three.js

**Backend**: Render
- **Data**: ~6,080 real exoplanets from NASA Exoplanet Archive
- **Model**: Decoder-only transformer (6 layers, 4 heads, RoPE embeddings)
- **Task**: Autoregressive generation of exoplanet orbital parameters
- **Application**: Generate planetary systems for stars like Vega

---

## Full ML Training Pipeline

### 1. Data Pipeline (Preprocessing)

**Source**: NASA Exoplanet Archive API (~6,080 confirmed exoplanets)

**EDA & Feature Engineering**:
```
Fetch ~6,080 exoplanet records from NASA TAP query
Filter for multi-planet systems (2+ planets per system)
Extract orbital elements (mass, semi-major axis, eccentricity, inclination, arg_periapsis)
Normalize to [0,1] range (log scale for mass/orbit, linear for angles)
Quantize to 8-bit tokens [0-255]
Augment 10x (add random angle noise ±5 tokens)
```

**Key Parameters from Data**:
- **Mass**: 0.0001 - 100,000 Earth masses (log-normal distribution)
- **Semi-major axis**: 0.001 - 100 AU (log-normal, peaks near star)
- **Eccentricity**: 0 - 0.93 (peaked at 0, long tail of eccentric orbits)
- **Inclination**: 0 - 3.07 radians (concentrated near 90° for transiting systems)

**Data Augmentation**: Add Gaussian noise to angular tokens (±5) for 10x expansion

---

### 2. Training Loop

**Architecture**: Decoder-only transformer (GPT-style)
```
Input tokens: (batch, 64)
Token embedding: (batch, 64, 128)
Rotary Positional Embeddings (RoPE)
6 Transformer Blocks
  - Multi-head self-attention (4 heads, causal masking)
  - Feed-forward network (2-layer MLP)
  - Layer normalization + residual connections
Layer norm + output projection: (batch, 64, 256)
```

**Loss Function**: Cross-entropy on next-token prediction

**Optimization**:
- Optimizer: AdamW (lr=1e-4, weight decay=0.01)
- Scheduler: CosineAnnealingLR (cosine decay over epochs)
- Gradient clipping: 1.0
- Batch size: 32 (configurable)

**Validation**: 90/10 train/val split, checkpoint best model on val loss

### 3. Colab Setup

Complete training pipeline on Google Colab (free T4 GPU).

### 4. EDA & Validation

Exploratory Data Analysis on a broader dataset of 6080 confirmed exoplanet records.

**Data Completeness**: Significant sparsity in many key parameters (like pl_masse, pl_rade, pl_eqt, pl_orbsmax, pl_orbeccen, pl_orbincl, pl_orblper, pl_bmasse), indicating that not all data is available for every exoplanet. This highlightes the importance of preprocessing steps where we filtered for complete records to train the generative model.

**Key Planetary Parameter Distributions**:
- **Orbital Period (pl_orbper)**: Showed a broad, log-normal distribution, with a peak for periods ranging from a few days to a few tens of days.
- **Planet Mass (pl_masse, pl_bmasse) and Radius (pl_rade)**: Both also exhibited log-normal distributions, with a prevalence of smaller planets but a long tail towards gas giants.
- **Semi-major Axis (pl_orbsmax)**: Displayed a log-normal distribution, with many planets orbiting very close to their stars.
- **Orbital Eccentricity (pl_orbeccen)**: Peaked near zero (circular orbits) but showed a significant number of eccentric orbits.
- **Orbital Inclination (pl_orbincl)**: Most inclinations were around 90 degrees, which is expected for transiting planets.
- **Longitude of Periastron (pl_orblper)**: Showed a more uniform distribution, but with many missing values.

**Stellar Parameter Distributions**:
- **Effective Temperature (st_teff)**: Peaked around 5000-6000 K (Sun-like stars), with a considerable number of cooler stars.
- **Stellar Mass (st_mass) and Radius (st_rad)**: Skewed towards smaller stars, consistent with the abundance of M-dwarfs.

**System Demographics**:
- **Planets per System (sy_pnum)**: Single-planet systems were by far the most common, followed by systems with two, three, or more planets. This clarified that 6000+ planets do not mean 6000+ unique systems.
- **Discovery Methods**: The Transit method was shown to be the dominant discovery technique, followed by the Radial Velocity method.

**Model Validation**:
- Generates physically plausible orbital parameters
- Learned log-normal distributions from real data
- Can condition on central mass and number of planets
- Diverse generation with temperature/top-k sampling

Commit message:

Streaming callback in browser_inference.js, UI toggle + wiring in index.html and main.js to enable streaming

README.md, after:

# Exoplanet System Generator

AI-driven stellar system generation & N-body physics simulation with 3D visualization. The model can generate systems with planetary masses all the way down to tiny asteroid-like objects (0.0001) up to gas giants and brown dwarfs (100,000 Earth masses). That huge range is because real exoplanet data spans everything from sub-Earth planets to super-Jupiters, so the model learned that full spectrum of possibilities.  

## [**DEMO**](https://adamfehse.github.io/someoneWondered/)

## TL;DR 

**~1.25M parameter model**
**Tech**: Transformer (RoPE, AdamW, cosine annealing) (PyTorch) + FastAPI + Three.js
**Backend**: Render or browser
- **Data**: ~6,080 real exoplanets from NASA Exoplanet Archive
- **Model**: Decoder-only transformer (6 layers, 4 heads, RoPE embeddings)
- **Task**: Autoregressive generation of exoplanet orbital parameters
- **Application**: Generate planetary systems for stars like Vega

## Browser Inference (ONNX + WASM)

The "Zero-Server" Loop 
- The Model: 1.25M parameters, optimized to 5MB ONNX (FP16). Small enough to cache in the browser’s IndexedDB.
- The Runtime: onnxruntime-web + WASM SIMD. No GPU required for sub-second response times.
- The Flow:Input: User sets system parameters (Central Mass, Planet Count).
- Inference: Transformer generates a "Token Sequence" autoregressively (2-3s).
- De-Quantize: normalization_stats.json maps tokens $\rightarrow$ actual Orbital Elements (Mass, SMA, Eccentricity).
- Physics: Hand-off to a lightweight Keplerian WASM engine for instant 3D rendering.

Everything happens client‑side

Same model, same tokenization, same output format as render backend version using python and torch just executed in the browser with a simpler physics step.

---

## Full ML Training Pipeline

### 1. Data Pipeline (Preprocessing)

**Source**: NASA Exoplanet Archive API (~6,080 confirmed exoplanets)

**EDA & Feature Engineering**:
```
Fetch ~6,080 exoplanet records from NASA TAP query
Filter for multi-planet systems (2+ planets per system)
Extract orbital elements (mass, semi-major axis, eccentricity, inclination, arg_periapsis)
Normalize to [0,1] range (log scale for mass/orbit, linear for angles)
Quantize to 8-bit tokens [0-255]
Augment 10x (add random angle noise ±5 tokens)
```

**Key Parameters from Data**:
- **Mass**: 0.0001 - 100,000 Earth masses (log-normal distribution)
- **Semi-major axis**: 0.001 - 100 AU (log-normal, peaks near star)
- **Eccentricity**: 0 - 0.93 (peaked at 0, long tail of eccentric orbits)
- **Inclination**: 0 - 3.07 radians (concentrated near 90° for transiting systems)

**Data Augmentation**: Add Gaussian noise to angular tokens (±5) for 10x expansion

---

### 2. Training Loop

**Architecture**: Decoder-only transformer (GPT-style)
```
Input tokens: (batch, 64)
Token embedding: (batch, 64, 128)
Rotary Positional Embeddings (RoPE)
6 Transformer Blocks
  - Multi-head self-attention (4 heads, causal masking)
  - Feed-forward network (2-layer MLP)
  - Layer normalization + residual connections
Layer norm + output projection: (batch, 64, 256)
```

**Loss Function**: Cross-entropy on next-token prediction

**Optimization**:
- Optimizer: AdamW (lr=1e-4, weight decay=0.01)
- Scheduler: CosineAnnealingLR (cosine decay over epochs)
- Gradient clipping: 1.0
- Epochs: 50

**Validation**: 90/10 train/val split, checkpoint best model on val loss

### 3. Colab Setup

Complete training pipeline on Google Colab (free T4 GPU).

### 4. EDA & Validation

Exploratory Data Analysis on a broader dataset of 6080 confirmed exoplanet records.

**Data Completeness**: Significant sparsity in many key parameters (like pl_masse, pl_rade, pl_eqt, pl_orbsmax, pl_orbeccen, pl_orbincl, pl_orblper, pl_bmasse), indicating that not all data is available for every exoplanet. This highlightes the importance of preprocessing steps where we filtered for complete records to train the generative model.

**Key Planetary Parameter Distributions**:
- **Orbital Period (pl_orbper)**: Showed a broad, log-normal distribution, with a peak for periods ranging from a few days to a few tens of days.
- **Planet Mass (pl_masse, pl_bmasse) and Radius (pl_rade)**: Both also exhibited log-normal distributions, with a prevalence of smaller planets but a long tail towards gas giants.
- **Semi-major Axis (pl_orbsmax)**: Displayed a log-normal distribution, with many planets orbiting very close to their stars.
- **Orbital Eccentricity (pl_orbeccen)**: Peaked near zero (circular orbits) but showed a significant number of eccentric orbits.
- **Orbital Inclination (pl_orbincl)**: Most inclinations were around 90 degrees, which is expected for transiting planets.
- **Longitude of Periastron (pl_orblper)**: Showed a more uniform distribution, but with many missing values.

**Stellar Parameter Distributions**:
- **Effective Temperature (st_teff)**: Peaked around 5000-6000 K (Sun-like stars), with a considerable number of cooler stars.
- **Stellar Mass (st_mass) and Radius (st_rad)**: Skewed towards smaller stars, consistent with the abundance of M-dwarfs.

**System Demographics**:
- **Planets per System (sy_pnum)**: Single-planet systems were by far the most common, followed by systems with two, three, or more planets. This clarified that 6000+ planets do not mean 6000+ unique systems.
- **Discovery Methods**: The Transit method was shown to be the dominant discovery technique, followed by the Radial Velocity method.

**Model Validation**:
- Generates physically plausible orbital parameters
- Learned log-normal distributions from real data
- Can condition on central mass and number of planets
- Diverse generation with temperature/top-k sampling
